**Goal is to write a summary of the sequencing techniques discussed in the "Evolution of DNA Sequencing Methods" -Jonathan Elsen Youtube video.

In the 'proto-sequencing' era very short sequences of dna were able to be found, but it seems like it was only able to discover under ten nucleotides through chemical methods.

Sanger Sequencing
In the next generation of 'manual sequencing' the Sanger method became the most popular method because of it's simpicity as well as being less toxic than similar methods. This method worked by identifying individual bases through chain-terminating reactions. DNA would be placed inside of a tube where it was put through heating cycles allowing it to synthesize more and more strands of DNA.  Initially, the deoxynucleotides had to be run separately for each nucleotide type, marking that nucleotide and preventing further synthesis. Later on dye-tagged deoxynucleotides labeled each nt type with a different colored label, allowing the different labels to all be run together. Eventually, the tube would contain short sequences of newly synthesized DNA were there was likely a labeled deoxynucleotide in place of every nucleotide. They were then run on a gel that separated the strands by size, thus displating the dyed tags in order of DNA sequence. Once the specially dye-tagged dnt were created, a machine was able to detect the color bands and output the sequence. Eventually a machine was able to automate the whole process.
The strengths here are obvious, a visible and machine-readable and ordered sequence. The weaknesses here are the time it takes to produce a short sequence and the resources it takes to produce (having to mix and PCR so many tubes and pour and run so many gels). Even when automation became available, there was still a need for large amounts of the target DNA, which meant researchers needed to know what they were looking for and didn't allow for the DNA exploration they desired. The amount of DNA needed took so much time to obtain *in vivo it slowed down the entire process.
References also from: https://www.khanacademy.org/science/high-school-biology/hs-molecular-genetics/hs-biotechnology/a/dna-sequencing

Illumina
The 'next gen' of sequencing was created to avoid the pitfalls of Sanger sequencing by creating clones (clusters) of DNA sequences on a plate that contains primers. Small amounts of isolated DNA would be adhered to a plate and clones would synthesize on the plate right next to the original piece. If done right, the clusters would be spaced out enough to distinguish one 'patch' from another. Flourescent nucleotides are only added one at a time per round, and after every round an image is captured and the type of nucleotide is recorder. After enough rounds of labeled nucleotide addition, the sequence of each DNA fragment is compiled and then the work of stitching together the sequences can take place.
One strength here is the small amount of DNA needed to run the sequencing, as well as the ability to create the DNA clones without the need for all the man-power. Another benefit is the *amount of DNA able to be sequenced at once and how quickly much more efficient than the Sanger method. It's even possible to run multiple samples simultaneously (multiplexing) in one go with sample tagging. Weaknesses with this method involve the storage of the data that these machines produce. So far there isn't an organized or standard method to keep the data.
References also from: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illumina_dye_sequencing

PacBio
Single molecule sequences takes a single DNA template and uses a camera to track addition of each nt by the DNA polymerase. The DNA polymerase is somehow attached to a hole in a plane, and the DNA template is inserted in one end. Using labeled nt, the addition of each new nt will be in line with the plane, making is simple to track and record the identity of each new addition in order.
An advantage of this method is the ability to sequence without having to cycle anything; this method is done continuously and collecting data the whole time. This also means that this method is extremely quick and can record thousands of bases at a time giving long reads. This method works well to collect epigentetic data. Detection of changes in the timing of synthesis have allowed for researchers to study DNA modification for epigenetic data. Problems with collection can arise due to breakages in the DNA template.

Nano Pore
In this other single molecule sequencing system, a protein membrane pore is adhered to a plane that contains a hole. DNA is inserted through one end of the pore, while a machine sensor detects the conformational or chemical changes of the pore as different nucleotides pass through it. The different shifts in the pore are associated with specific nucleotides, thus allowing for the sequence of DNA to be read in order. Like the PacBio method, this allows for reads of long strands of a single DNA. Real time sequencing, in a device that can be hooked up to a computer allows extremely quick (a couple hours) sequencing and shows promise of being a portable sequencing device. At the time the youtube video was created, Elsen points out that this is not the most accurate device and is also very expensive per sequence, but has the potential to get better as the technology develops. While it's very quick, it's discussed it is more useful for "simple" DNA at this time.

